# 2. Qualifying

## 2.1. Qualifying Procedure (General).

1. All qualifying attempts will make use of traditional Indy 500 4 lap average qualifying, drivers leaving Pit Lane will cross around the track, complete a warm up lap, and commence their run the SECOND time passing the Start/Finish Line.
2.1.2.	The Green Flag will be given the between the second time a driver passes the commit cones for Pit Lane, and them passing the Start/Finish Line. At this point, a driver’s previous time will be wiped, and the new time will be taken as their qualifying time.
2.1.3.	Drivers may wave off any attempt before taking the Green Flag, by using voice/text chat on iRacing to communicate with Race Control. Drivers must ensure that this wave off is called before the Green Flag is thrown, and no later than exiting Turn 4 the second time after they leave Pit Lane.
2.1.4.	A driver will complete their 4 laps, receive the chequered flag from race control, and then may slow their car down to a complete stop at any point afterwards. They do NOT need to return their car to Pit Road.
2.1.5.	In the event that a driver crashes their car during any run, they will be eligible to use a virtual Spare/T car to complete any further runs. A driver crashing this car will be able to take no further part in the session in question. Drivers crashing both of their cars in a single session will be able to make use of ONE car in following sessions leading up to the race. It will be assumed that this car is rebuilt after each session, to preserve the ability for drivers to race.
2.1.6.	It is a driver’s responsibility to ensure that all their equipment, including their internet connection, works correctly before completing a qualifying run. In the event that a driver generates a 0.00.000 lap time due to connection issues, the run will not count, and they will lose a qualifying run attempt.

## 2.2. Qualifying Procedure (Pole Day Sessions 1 & 2)

1. Drivers will be drawn and announced on the ISOWC Discord. The first qualifying run order for the session which they are registered. The running order will be made by random ballot, and will also be advertised on any promotional website and the iRacing IndyCar Forum.
2. The first qualifying run will commence 15 minutes after the server opens, to allow time for drivers to enter, and for Race Control to complete their final preparations. Drivers may use these 15 minutes as a shakedown to run on track, in order to check their connection and hardware. A 5 minute warning will be given before the end of this 15 minute shakedown, and all drivers will be instructed to return to Pit Lane upon the completion of the 15 minutes.
3. It is a driver’s responsibility to ensure that they enter the server in time for their first qualifying run. A driver who arrives late will forfeit their right to their first run, and may only compete for a time once all other drivers have completed their first run, and second qualifying attempts begin. In the event that a driver is not ready to start their run within 60 seconds of Race Control alerting them to their first qualifying attempt commencing, then their run will also be forfeited.
4. Drivers will complete their initial qualifying runs in the order determined by the Random Ballot. With the exception of the first 15 minutes of the session, as advertised in Rule 2.2.2 No driver is allowed on track (Including Pit Lane, and any run off areas), until 60 seconds before their qualifying run. Any driver breaking this rule will be subject to a penalty from Race Control, including the forfeiture of a qualifying run, or disqualification from the session.
5. Once all eligible drivers have completed their initial qualifying attempt, drivers will be able to “Present Themselves” for further runs within the session. Drivers wishing to present themselves will do so via Discord using an automated system. More instructions will be provided in the official Driver’s Briefing. Race Control will acknowledge this request, and place the driver in the queue for another attempt.
6. A maximum of three qualifications attempts per Car shall be permitted in the session, including their initial attempt, regardless of whether or not an attempt is run to completion.
7. A driver may “Wave Off” their request to do a run at any point, either through Discord, or by sending a Private Message to Race Control in the session. Race Control will acknowledge this request, and remove the driver from the queue.
8. Race Control will list the current running order for Qualifying runs on iRacing Voice Chat, and in Discord, after each qualifying attempt. It is a driver’s responsibility to be prepared for their run, and in the event that a driver is not ready to start their run within 60 seconds of Race Control alerting them to their first qualifying attempt commencing, then they will lose their place in the queue.
  1. Race Control may investigate repeat offenders of this rule, and reserve the right to count a failure to start a run as an attempt for repeat offenders, especially if they reasonably suspect deliberate time wasting to prevent other drivers completing a run.
9. As soon as a driver passes the Start finish line, as outlined in Rule 2.1.2, they are classified as making an attempt.
10. Race Control or an Entrant may terminate a qualifications attempt before completion.
  1. A driver may terminate their run by returning to Pit Lane at any point. The Car will be charged with an attempt
  2. Race Control may terminate a drivers run upon display of a black flag at any time prior to the point where the Car crosses the start/finish line at the conclusion of the fourth consecutively timed lap. The Car will be charged with an attempt and must return immediately to the pit lane. This will be used only if a driver is driving in an unsafe manner in this session.
11.	Session A will last for 2 hours, and Session B 6 Hours. A driver who is on track, and had completed 3 out of 4 of their consecutively timed laps as the chequered flag falls on the session will be able to complete their run. A driver who has completed less than 3 out of their 4 consecutively timed laps will not be able to complete their run, due to limitations with iRacing timing. In this case, the drivers previous time will stand.
12.	At the conclusion of the second initial Qualifying Session, the results will be combined, and the following will occur:
  1.	The 9 Cars posting the best four-consecutively timed laps shall advance to The Top 9 Shootout (See Section 2.3) ,
  2.	The Cars posting the 10th through 24th best four-consecutively timed laps shall be ranked in order of time beginning with the best time in position 10,
  3.	All remaining Cars posting four- consecutively timed laps shall not be ranked and their times shall be voided, and will have to take part in the Bump Session in order to make the field (See Section 2.4)
13. The combined results will appear on ISOWC.Org, iRacing.com’s IndyCar forum, and announced via Discord, once finalised by Race Control.

## 2.3. Qualifying Procedure (Top 9 Shootout)

1. The session will be open for the top 9 drivers on qualifying speed, after the results from the two initial sessions have been combined, as outlined in section 2.2.12.1.
2. The first qualifying run will commence 15 minutes after the server opens, to allow time for drivers to enter, and for Race Control to complete their final preparations. Drivers may use these 15 minutes as a shakedown to run on track, in order to check their connection and hardware. A 5 minute warning will be given before the end of this 15 minute shakedown, and all drivers will be instructed to return to Pit Lane upon the completion of the 15 minutes.
3. Drivers will have one attempt at a 4 lap qualifying run, the order which will be the reverse of the Top 9 standings. This means that the driver who set the 9th fastest time in the Initial sessions (Once combined) will run first, and the driver that set the fastest time in the Initial sessions (Once combined) will run last.
4. Drivers arriving late onto the server, crashing during their Qualifying run, having connection issues or not attempting a lap will be ranked behind those who completed a successful 4 lap run, based upon their qualifying speed in the initial sessions.

## 2.4. Qualifying Procedure (Bump Session)

1. The session will be open for drivers 10 and lower on qualifying speed, after the results from the two initial sessions have been combined, as outlined in section 2.2.12.2.
2. The first qualifying run will commence 15 minutes after the server opens, to allow time for drivers to enter, and for Race Control to complete their final preparations. Drivers may use these 15 minutes as a shakedown to run on track, in order to check their connection and hardware. A 5 minute warning will be given before the end of this 15 minute shakedown, and all drivers will be instructed to return to Pit Lane upon the completion of the 15 minutes.
3. Drivers will be able to “Present Themselves” for runs throughout the session. Drivers wishing to present themselves will do so via Discord using an automated system. More instructions will be provided in the official Driver’s Briefing. Race Control will acknowledge this request, and place the driver in the queue for another attempt.
4. A maximum of three qualification attempts per Car shall be permitted in the session, regardless of whether or not an attempt is run to completion.
5. A driver may “Wave Off” their request to do a run at any point, either through TeamSpeak, or by sending a Private Message to Race Control in the session. Race Control will acknowledge this request, and remove the driver from the queue.
6. Race Control will list the current running order for Qualifying runs on iRacing Voice Chat, and Discord, after each qualifying attempt. It is a driver’s responsibility to be prepared for their run, and in the event that a driver is not ready to start their run within 60 seconds of Race Control alerting them to their first qualifying attempt commencing, then they will lose their place in the queue.
7. Race Control may investigate repeat offenders of this rule, and reserve the right to count a failure to start a run as an attempt for repeat offenders, especially if they reasonably suspect deliberate time wasting to prevent other drivers completing a run.
8. The first person to notice this and tell me on the discord will get a $5 iRacing credit.
9. As soon as a driver passes the Start finish line, as outlined in Rule 2.1.2, they are classified as making an attempt.
10. Race Control or an Entrant may terminate a qualifications attempt before completion.
11.	A driver may terminate their run by returning to Pit Lane at any point. The Car will be charged with an attempt
12.	Race Control may terminate a drivers run upon display of a black flag at any time prior to the point where the Car crosses the start/finish line at the conclusion of the fourth consecutively timed lap. The Car will be charged with an attempt and must return immediately to the pit lane. This will be used in the event that a driver is clearly slower than the 33rd fastest qualifying time, and has no real chance of making the field during that run.
13.	Rule 2.4.10 will be enforced to a greater extent towards the end of the session, to ensure as many drivers with attempts remaining have the opportunity to attempt to qualify.
14.	The session will end 6 hours after the server opens. A driver who is on track, and had completed 3 out of 4 of their consecutively timed laps as the chequered flag falls on the session will be able to complete their run. A driver who has completed less than 3 out of their 4 consecutively timed laps will not be able to complete their run, due to limitations with iRacing timing. In this case, the drivers previous time will stand.
15.	At the conclusion of the session, the top 24 drivers will be added to the 9 drivers already qualified, from positions 10 backwards, to form the field of 33 drivers.

## 2.5. Post Qualifying

1. In the event that a driver withdraws their entry, then their position will be granted to the driver who set the 10th fastest qualifying time in the bump session. The process will continue as necessary. These drivers will form the last starting position(s) on the grid, moving all relevant drivers up one position.
2. The final results and grid will appear on ISOWC.org, iRacing.com’s IndyCar forum, and announced via Discord, once finalised by Race Control.
