# 3. Race Procedures

## 3.1. Warm Up and Practise Start

1. Before the race, a 90 minute practise session will be held. This will be split into two parts as follows:
  1. The second 45 minutes will be used to practise gridding and race starts, as laid out in section 3.2. Drivers will be required to clear the track after the first 45 minutes have been completed
2. All drivers must be on the server by the end of the first half of the practise session.
3.As much as time allows, three practise starts will take place during the second 45 minutes of practise. These will be co-ordinated by Race Control.
  1. Drivers will be required to join the track, and form rows of 3, in the same order as their Grid Position. Race Control will attempt as much as possible to assist in helping drivers to grid. The Manual Pace Car will also be on track to pace the field.
  2. Once drivers are all lined up, Race Control will hand control of the field to the leader, as defined in section 3.2.8 who will take the start as they would in the race.
  3.  Race chat must be kept to minimum for the duration of gridding process, unless communicating with Race Control, to allow the field to line up effectively.
4. In the event that sufficient Race Starts are completed to a satisfactory level, the track will re-open for practise.

## 3.2. Race Start Procedure

1. This race will make use of a 3 wide start. This will only be used to start the race, and not for restarts, where double file restarts will be used.
2. Due to iRacing capabilities, it is not possible to set a 3 wide start automatically, and therefore drivers will need to manually arrange themselves in their correct grid spot for the start. 3 extra laps have been provided to assist in this.
3. The cars will pace from a standing start. Another class car (Pontiac Solstice) will be used as a Secondary Pace Car for the 2 extra laps, to assist in being able to provide the grandeur of the race, as well as helping in the gridding process.
4. The iRacing Pace Car will bring the field round for the first lap of pacing, and this will be double file. Once the iRacing Pace Car pulls down Pit Lane, the Secondary Pace Car will take control of the field. Drivers are reminded that the iRacing Green Flag DOES NOT signal the start of the race.
5. After crossing the Start finish line, the pace car will increase it’s speed to 90MPH, and 2 wide gridding will commence.
6. The driver in Position 1 must maintain a 10 car length gap to the pace car at all times when at pacing speed, with the drivers in positions 2 and 3 alongside. Drivers must maintain a 5 car length distance to the car in front at all times when at pace speed, alongside drivers in their row.
7. Drivers should align themselves in their correct position on the grid one by one, starting from the front of the pack. Once a row has been completed, the next driver should align their car in the same lane as the driver ahead on the inside line, and so on, until all 33 drivers are lined up.
8.	The Pace Car Speeds will be as follows: Lap 1: 65MPH | Lap 2: 90 MPH | Lap 3: 110 MPH
9. Once all cars are lined up in rows of three, on the backstretch on the third lap of pacing (Lap 2 of the race), the Pace Car will drive ahead of the field and off the track. At this point the control of the field will pass to the driver in Position 1. He/She must keep their speed at 110 MPH until after passing the Pit Lane Entry. At this point He/She is free to accelerate up to racing speed, and the Green Flag will start the race.

## 3.3. Yellow Flag Procedures

1. Full Course Cautions will normally be thrown automatically by the iRacing software, in the event that a crash impedes the racing surface. Under certain circumstances, Race Control may throw a Full Course Caution, if they feel that one is needed, for example, if one fails to be generated by the software.
2. The decision as to whether to declare a caution, or extend the duration of a caution may not be protested or appealed.
3. Drivers are not under any circumstances allowed to “Force” a caution, by remaining on the racing line after their car has come to a rest for longer than necessary, or otherwise re-positioning their car after a crash on the racing line to impede the racing surface. A 1 lap deduction will be issued as a penalty to any driver found to be “Forcing” a caution.
4. In the event of a full course caution being thrown, it is the responsibility for drivers to safely make their way to the pace line. Drivers should make use of the Relative display,and listen to announcements from drivers, as to the location of their car in relation to the pace line.
5. Drivers should follow the car in front, or pace car, at a steady speed and distance. Excessive weaving to warm up tyres is prohibited, as it creates potential hazards to other drivers.
6. Pit Lane will open once the pace field has gathered. Drivers wishing to pit under cautions do not need to make their intentions known, however must not “Dummy”, either moving from the entrance of Pit Lane to the race track, or vice versa at the last moment. This may be classified as reckless driving, and a penalty issued because of it.
7. On exiting pit lane, drivers should ensure they safely rejoin the pace group, as soon as practically possible. Drivers will have to enter the track on the backstretch, following the designated access roads, else will be liable to an End Of Line penalty.
8. Drivers a lap down, ahead of the leader will be given the “Wave around”, as the pace car crosses the Start Finish line, signalling one lap to the restart. No other “Wave around”, or “Lucky Dog” rule will be in effect under any circumstances.
9. All restarts are Single File. Lapped drivers behind the leader will NOT be sent to the rear of the field on the Two To Go Sign, unless there are less than 10 laps to go. Any driver on the lead lap who chooses to pit on the 1 to go sign, will however be forced to start at the tail end of the field behind lapped cars.
10.	As soon as the Pace car leaves the track at the end of the “One To Go” lap, the field is then paced by the driver at the front of the pace line. There is no requirement to wait for the Green Flag to build up speed, however, he/she must ensure that their actions do not cause issues of safety for those behind them.
11.	Drivers may not “Hang back” in order to gain a run on other drivers at the restart. A 5 car length rule will be enforced for all drivers, with a Drive Though penalty being awarded to a driver failing to stay with the pace field.
12.	Once a driver applies throttle on a restart, he should continue to do so in a consistent manner unless either attempting to recover from wheel-spin, or to avoid colliding “Running into” a driver in front.
13.	Drivers should time the application of the throttle on a restart to ensure that they have no need to “Check Up”, forcing a concertina effect behind them. Drivers failing to observe this rule may be issued a penalty for reckless driving.

## 3.4. Incident Procedures

1. In the event of Race Control wishing to review an incident, they will create an incident report on the ISOWC official website which will promptly a notification both in-sim as well as in the official ISOWC Discord server. Drivers may be requested to support their corner if necessary, in helping Race Control to form a balanced opinion.
2. A driver may request an incident to be looked at by alerting Race Control either through the text chat function, or through audio. A driver will also be able to grant permission for a “spotter” to create incident reports on the ISOWC official website.
  - The lap number
  - The car(s) involved
  - The nature of the incident
3.	Drivers may report incidents up to 12 hours after the end of the race. Any penalties being applied post-race will be in the form of a time penalty equivalent to time that would have been lost for the appropriate penalty in the race.
4. Race Control will aim to make a decision to each incident within 10 minutes of it being reported; however, if there are many incidents, it may take longer for a decision to be made. Drivers will be alerted of any delays to investigating an incident.
5.On race control having reviewed an incident, and making a decision on the outcome, the official decision will be entered on the ISOWC official website. This will trigger a message being sent both to the in-sim chat as well as to the ISOWC Discord Server. If the field is under caution, Race Control may choose to delay the issuing of a penalty until after the resumption of Green Flag racing, and the relevant driver will be made aware of this.
6. In some instances, Race Control may deem that the incident does not warrant a penalty alone, especially if it is the driver’s first incident of that kind. In this case the driver will be issued with a warning, advising them of what further action would be taken should the incident be repeated.
7. In the event of an incident taking place in the last 10 laps of an oval the race, Race Control will review the incident at the conclusion of the race. In this instance, if a penalty is awarded, the duration of the penalty will be added to the overall time of the driver being awarded the penalty.
8. There is no right to appeal any decision made by Race Control during, or after a race. Any abuse towards race control will be seen as a further violation, and another penalty will be issued either during the race, before the publication of official results, or for the next race the driver enters, as is deemed appropriate.
9. Race Control will, upon request give fuller reasoning as to why a penalty was awarded after the race has been completed, either verbally, or in writing. This should however, be regarded as a statement, and no further discussion will be entered into the incident.

## 3.5. Race Finish/Cool down/Results

1. After each driver takes the chequered flag, they should exit their car in a manner that doesn’t impede the racing surface, or other drivers.
2. At no point on the cool down lap may drivers cause contact with others with the intention of showing retaliation. Any driver found doing so will be awarded a penalty from the final results.
3. The winner of the race is welcome to do a “Burnout” style celebration once all other drivers are off the racing surface.
4. The Top 3 Drivers are invited to be interviewed by the Broadcast Team after the race through TeamSpeak: ts.racespot.tv
5. All results are provisional until published by the series admins acting as race control. Any penalties will be added to a driver’s time, which may affect their official finishing position.
