# 4. Race Procedures

## 4.1. Hosting & Registration

1. All series events will take place on US servers, unless exceptional circumstances prevent this from occurring. This policy will be reviewed as necessary.
2. All series events will be "Open Setup" events hosted as a League Session under the ISOWC league.
3. All regular rounds of the championship (excluding the ISOWC 500) comprise of 2 iRacing sessions. The first is a practice / qualifying session, which will be followed by a second session, comprising a warm up and a race. This is to facilitate qualifying “bumping” that will take place before each race.
4. There will be NO guaranteed spots, and NO transfer races in the ISOWC Series.
5. The first server of the race weekend will launch ~2 hours before the scheduled green flag time on the day as advertised, unless maintenance by iRacing prevents this from occurring. Drivers must be in the Series Discord to receive updates from the RC team about any schedule changes that might occur due to circumstances out of the Admin teams’ control.
6. Grid sizes will be limited to 32 cars on Road Courses, and 35 cars on Ovals (Excluding Indy, which remains at 33 cars).
7. Race Control will alert any driver who has Ping/Quality issues during the registration and practice period, to the nature of the issue, and advise them to
remedy them as much as possible during this time. Drivers who consistently have quality issues, especially "Blinking" may be given End of Line penalties for the race, or removed from the server, to facilitate the safe running of others.
8. All regular rounds of the championship will follow this schedule on Race Day:
| Time (UTC)  | Description |
| ----------- | ----------- |
| 3:50pm      | Session 1 Live |
| 5:00pm      | Driver’s Briefing |
| 5:10pm      | Start of Road Qualifying |
| 5:20pm      | Start of Oval Qualifying |
| 5:30pm      | End of Qualifying |
| ~5:45pm     | Session 2 live |
| 5:55pm      | Race session is advanced – additional pacing laps will be applied |
| 6:00pm      | Green Flag |

## 4.2. Weather

1. All regular race weekends will utilize dynamic weather at all times for official practices, qualifying and the race. This will be done by using a pre-set date & time when generating the iRacing session, and using the “Dynamic Weather” functionality that iRacing provides.
2. The weather settings are generated by iRacing, and league admins have no control over it.
3. The exact date & time for each race will be announced one week before the race in the official driver’s briefing.
4. Appendix 1 contains information specific to the weather for the ISOWC 500 which will not utilize dynamic weather at all times.

## 4.3. Practice

1.	Each official race session will commence with a 90 minute practice for Oval races and 80 minutes for Road Races. This is a chance for drivers to join the server, and finalise their preparations for the race.
2.	It will be assumed that drivers will have completed sufficient practice in test sessions and other means to be able to drive safely, and in an appropriate manner, to ensure safe and fair competition within the series. Drivers driving in an unsafe manner, or adversely affecting the enjoyment and safe racing of others will be warned, and asked to test further before re-joining the session. Drivers failing to comply with this will be removed from the server, and will score zero points for that race.
3.	Drivers exiting Pit Lane are required to follow the natural pit exit lane, and join the track in a safe manner after the pit exit merges with the main track.
4.	Drivers should maintain a steady race speed throughout the practice session, and not slow down un-necessarily.
5.	Drivers should use the same care, and consideration for others during a practice session, as they would in a race.
6.	At 5pm UTC, Race Control will announce in the session that the Driver’s Briefing is beginning in Discord. Cars are not permitted to be on track during the Briefing and Drivers are required to join Discord for the briefing.

## 4.4. Qualifying

1. All Oval events will make use of Single Car (Lone) qualifying. All Road Events will make use of a timed, open qualification period.
2. Oval events will comprise of 4 laps of qualifying, whilst road courses will comprise of a 20 minute open session, where drivers can complete as many laps as required.
3. Text chat and voice chat will be disabled for Oval Based qualifying sessions.
4. It is the responsibility of drivers entering or re-entering the server during qualifying must ensure that they can set a qualifying time within the allotted time period.
5. Drivers failing to complete a qualifying run, will be scored in terms of championship points after all cars setting qualifying times.
6. Any lap where a driver leaves the racing surface, as defined in section 5 will not have that lap counted, and in the event that this is their fastest lap, they will be liable to incur an End of Field grid penalty.
7. Drivers in Road based qualifying must ensure that their actions on track do not impede other drivers unfairly, and for no reason. Examples of this include slowing down excessively to find a gap on track, or not providing room to other drivers on
track who are on a flying lap whilst not on one personally Any driver caught infringing this will be liable to incur an End Of Field grid penalty or even exclusion from that race weekend.
8. On road courses, drivers may qualify on either the primary or alternate tyre. For cars that qualify in the Top-10 (regardless of grid penalties that will be applied), they must use the same compound at the start of the race as they qualified on. All other cars have a free choice of tyre.
9. At the conclusion of qualifying, Race Control will post the final results in the discord channel along with the grid for the race. Drivers must only join the 2nd session if they are included on the starting grid.

## 4.5. Gridding and Race Start

1.	Drivers will be given 2 minutes to grid their cars before the commencement of the race. Drivers wishing to start from pit lane should not grid, and wait for the "Missed Start" button to be shown on the launch screen.
2. Driver’s should ensure that if they qualified in the Top 10, they are gridded on the tyre they qualified on.
3. Drivers may not request an End of Line (EOL) penalty at the race start. If you wish to be shuffled to the rear of the field, you must start from pit lane as mentioned above instead.
4. All races will make use of rolling starts. Drivers should follow the car in front, or pace car, at a steady speed and distance. Excessive weaving to warm up tyres is prohibited, as it creates potential hazards to other drivers.
5. Chat should be kept to a minimum during the gridding and warm up lap(s), to allow Race Control to make any relevant announcements concerning the race.
6. As soon as the Pace car leaves the track at the end of the warm up lap(s), the field is then paced by the driver on Pole Position. There is no requirement to wait for the Green Flag to build up speed, however, he/she must ensure that their actions do not cause issues of safety for those behind them.
7. Drivers starting from Pit Lane will be held by the service for a few seconds after the Green Flag. Upon being able to leave Pit Lane, drivers are required to follow the natural pit exit lane, and join the track in a safe manner after the pit exit merges with the main track. Failure to do so will result in a Black Flag, even if one is not given by the iRacing software.

## 4.6. Cautions & Restarts

1. Full Course Cautions will normally be thrown automatically by the iRacing software, in the event that a crash impedes the racing surface. On both Road and Oval tracks, Race Control has full discretion to throw a Full Course Caution, if they feel that one is needed, for example, if one fails to be generated by the software on an oval or if they warrant one is needed on a Road Course
2. The decision as to whether to declare a caution, or extend the duration of a caution may not be protested or appealed.
3. Drivers are not under any circumstances allowed to "Force" a caution, by remaining on the racing line after their car has come to a rest for longer than necessary, or otherwise re-positioning their car after a crash on the racing line to impede the racing surface. A 1 lap deduction will be issued as a penalty to any driver found to be "Forcing" a caution.
4. In the event of a full course caution being thrown, it is the responsibility for drivers to safely make their way to the pace line. Drivers should make use of the Relative display, and listen to announcements from drivers, as to the location of their car in relation to the pace line.
5. Drivers should follow the car in front, or pace car, at a steady speed and distance. Excessive weaving to warm up tyres is prohibited, as it creates potential hazards to other drivers.
6. Pit Lane will open once the pace field has gathered. Drivers wishing to pit under cautions do not need to make their intentions known, however must not "Dummy", either moving from the entrance of Pit Lane to the race track, or vice versa at the last moment. This may be classified as reckless driving, and a penalty issued because of it.
7. On exiting pit lane, drivers should ensure they safely re-join the pace group, as soon as practically possible.
8. Drivers a lap down, ahead of the leader will be given the "Wave around", as the pace car crosses the Start Finish line, signalling one lap to the restart. No other "Wave around", or "Lucky Dog" rule will be in effect under any circumstances.
9. All restarts are Single File. Lapped drivers behind the leader may be sent to the rear of the field if it is felt that they may hamper the racing of those around them, due to their speed, or other reasonable factors.
10. As soon as the Pace car leaves the track at the end of the "One To Go" lap, the field is then paced by the driver at the front of the pace line. There is no requirement to wait for the Green Flag to build up speed, however, he/she must ensure that their actions do not cause issues of safety for those behind them.
11. Drivers may not "Hang back" in order to gain a run on other drivers at the restart. A 5 car length rule will be enforced for all drivers, with a Drive Though penalty being awarded to a driver failing to stay with the pace field.
12. Once a driver applies throttle on a restart, he should continue to do so in a consistent manner unless either attempting to recover from wheel-spin, or to avoid colliding "Running into" a driver in front.
13. Drivers should time the application of the throttle on a restart to ensure that they have no need to "Check Up", forcing a concertina effect behind them. Drivers failing to observe this rule may be issued a penalty for reckless driving.

##4.7. Pit Stops

1. Drivers wishing to pit should announce to other drivers on the server their intentions, on the lap that they are pitting.
2. Drivers should safely enter Pit Lane at all times, in a manner that does not force drivers to change their normal racing line.
  1. On ovals, drivers should enter pit lane through the designated "Entry lane" from the back stretch, unless a track does not have such a lane (For example, Milwaukee).
  2. For Indianapolis, Drivers Should Pit off Turn 4 unless out of fuel, in which case they should use the access road.
  3. On road courses, drivers should follow the pit entry road, adjusting speed as necessary to ensure smooth, safe entry onto Pit Road.
3. Once in pit lane, a driver should stay fully in the correct lane, until pitting. Driver’s in the slow lane must give way to cars in the fast lane when exiting pit road. Drivers causing accidents within pit lane will receive a 15 second stop and go penalty.
4. In the event of Pit Lane becoming obstructed, due to a crash/spin/other racing incident, a series admin may throw a yellow flag to ensure no further incidents take place as a driver attempts to recover from their incident.
5. On exiting pit lane, drivers are required to follow the natural pit exit lane, and join the track in a safe manner after the pit exit merges with the main track.
  1. With the exception of Pocono, this will be on the Back Straightaway.
  2. This will normally be where a double line merges into a single, or there is no line.
  3. In the event that there is no clear evidence to define a merge point, one will be assigned by Race Control, and reported to drivers at least 24 hours before the race through weekly communication.
  4. A Driver who merges onto the track before this point, will be awarded a 15 Second Stop- Go Penalty, regardless of time gained in doing so.
6. Drivers may only use a maximum of 3 pit boxes when entering and exiting their pit stall. Drivers that use additional pit boxes will be assessed a Drive Through Penalty.
7. On road courses, driver’s must use both compounds of tyres for at least one complete lap in the race.

## 4.8. Incidents and Towing

1. In the event of an incident, it is a driver’s individual responsibility to assess if it is safe for them to resume racing or not.
2. A driver being involved in an incident, being the originator or victim of it, should seek to clear the racing line as soon as possible.
  1. On ovals, if a car is riding the wall, the driver should seek to decrease the speed of the car, whilst ensuring that the car does not "Slide down" the track, onto the racing line. Once the field has passed, the driver may then assess if he/she can return to the pits under one's own power, or request a tow.
  2. On road courses, drivers should seek to keep the track surface as clear as possible, especially the racing line. A driver should not make any sudden movements with the car whilst others are trying to pass it, but instead wait for them to clear it before correcting the car, and then assess if he/she can return to the pits under one's own power, or request a tow.
3. No Free Tows are available in any race. Drivers must request a tow from RC – either in the iRacing VC or through a text communication. Cars that tow without permission will receive penalties for future events ranging from a EOL penalty to exclusion from the next event.
4. A driver who has sustained damage may drive back to pit lane under their own power if able to do so. However, the following rules apply.
  1. The driver must be able to steer the car in both directions.
	2. The driver must be able to control the car in such a way that he would not create a further incident.
  3. The driver must be able to maintain a speed of at least 50% the racing pace.
  4. Where the driver's speed is above 80% of the racing pace, the driver may directly follow the iRacing procedure for dealing with damage (Meatball) flag. However, if the drivers speed is below 80% of the racing pace, he must pit at the first possible opportunity (The next time he can enter the pits).
  5. A driver failing to follow these rules may be awarded a black flag in addition to any penalties they accrue.
5. A driver returning to pit lane after an incident causing damage should make other drivers nearby aware, and do everything possible to keep the racing line clear for other drivers to continue racing as normal.
6. If a driver is returning to pit lane after an incident whilst the field is under caution, he/she must not impede the ability for other drivers to complete their pit stop in a swift and timely manner. Furthermore, the same pit lane procedures apply regardless if a driver is damaged or not.
7. In the event of a driver being unable to drive their car back to pit lane under their own power, it is their responsibility to request a tow as quickly as possible so as not to impede the racing surface, or place the track under caution. A driver who remains in the same position, without moving, or requesting a tow after 15 seconds after coming to a rest will be retired from the race.

## 4.9. Race Finish/Cool down/Results
1. After each driver takes the chequered flag, they should exit their car in a manner that doesn't impede the racing surface, or other drivers.
2. At no point on the cool down lap may drivers cause contact with others with the Intention of showing retaliation. Any driver found doing so will be awarded a penalty from the final results.
3. The winner of the race is welcome to do a "Burnout" style celebration once all other drivers are off the racing surface.
4. All results are provisional until published by the series admin acting as race control. Any penalties will be added to a driver’s time, which may affect their official finishing position. The final race results will be posted to the ISOWC website.
